Thanksgiving After Holy Communion


First Prayer

Glory to thee, O God; Glory to thee, O God; Glory to thee, O God.

THANKSGIVING PRAYER

I thank thee, O Lord my God, that thou hast not rejected me, a sinner, but hast vouchsafed me to become a communicant of thy holy things. I thank thee that thou hast vouchsafed me, the unworthy, to partake of thine immaculate and heavenly gifts. But, O Master who lovest mankind, who didst both die for us and rise again and didst bestow upon us these thy dread and life-giving mysteries for the benefit and sanctification of our souls and bodies, grant that they may be for me also unto healing of soul and body, unto the averting of everything contrary thereto, unto the enlightenment of the eyes of my heart, unto the peace of my spiritual powers, unto faith unashamed, unto love unfeigned, unto increase of wisdom, unto the keeping of thy commandments, unto growth in thy divine grace and the attainment of thy kingdom, that, preserved by them in thy holiness, I may ever remember thy grace and henceforth live not unto myself but unto thee, our Master and Benefactor. And thus, when this life is ended in the hope of eternal life, I may attain unto everlasting rest, where the sound of those who keep festival is unceasing and the delight of those who behold the ineffable beauty of thy countenance is boundless; for thou art the true Desire and unutterable Joy of those who love thee, O Christ our God, and all creation hymneth thee forever. Amen.

A PRAYER OF ST. BASIL THE GREAT

O Master, Christ our God, King of the ages and Maker of all things, I thank thee for all the good things which thou hast bestowed upon me and for this partaking of thine immaculate and life-giving mysteries. Wherefore I pray thee, who art good and lovest mankind: Keep me under thy protection and in the shadow of thy wings, and grant unto me with a pure conscience and even unto my last breath to partake of thy holy things unto remission of sins and unto life everlasting. For thou art the Bread of life, the Fountain of holiness, the Giver of good things, and unto thee we ascribe glory, together with the Father and the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

A PRAYER OF St. SYMEON THE TRANSLATOR 

O thou who willingly dost give thy flesh to me as food, thou who art a fire consuming the unworthy: Consume me not, O my Creator, but rather pass through me for the right ordering of my members, into all my joints, my reins, my heart. Burn thou the thorns of all my transgressions. Cleanse my soul, and hallow thou my thoughts. Make firm my knees and my bones likewise. Enlighten as one my five senses. Nail down the whole of me in thy fear. Ever shelter, guard and keep me from every soul-corrupting deed and word. Cleanse, purify and rule me. Adorn, teach and enlighten me. Show me to be a dwelling-place of thy Spirit alone and in no wise the dwelling-place of sin, that from me, thy habitation, through the entrance of thy communion, every evil deed and every passion may flee as from fire. As intercessors I bring to thee all the sanctified, both the leaders of the bodiless powers, thy Forerunner and thy wise apostles and, besides these, thine immaculate and pure Mother. Do thou receive their prayers, O my Christ, who art compassionate, and make thy servant to be a child of the light; for thou alone, O good One, art the Sanctification and Radiance of our souls, and to thee as God and Master, as is right, we all ascribe glory, day by day. Amen.

ANONYMOUS

May thy holy Body, O Lord Jesus Christ our God, be unto me for life eternal, and thy precious Blood unto remission of my sins. May this Eucharist be unto me for joy, health, and gladness; and at thy dread Second Coming make me, a sinner, worthy to stand at the right hand of thy glory: through the intercessions of thine all-immaculate Mother and of all thy Saints. Amen.

TO THE MOST HOLY THEOTOKOS

O all-holy Lady Theotokos, light of my darkened soul, my hope, my shelter, my refuge, my consolation and my joy: I thank thee that thou hast accounted me worthy, although unworthy, to be a partaker of the immaculate Body and precious Blood of thy Son. But do thou, who gavest birth to the true Light, enlighten the spiritual eyes of my heart. O thou who didst bear the Fountain of immortality, enliven thou me who lie dead in sin. O compassion-loving Mother of the merciful God, have mercy on me, and grant me compunction and contrition of heart and humility in my thoughts and the recall of my thoughts from captivity. And account me worthy, even unto my last breath, to receive without condemnation the sanctification of the immaculate mysteries, unto the healing of both soul and body. And grant unto me tears of repentance and confession, that I may hymn thee and glorify thee all the days of my life, for blessed and glorified art thou unto all ages. (thrice) Amen.

Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word. For mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou hast prepared before the face of all people, a light to lighten the Gentiles and the glory of thy people Israel. 

After the Trisagion Prayers, we read the apolytikion and kontakion of the saint whose Divine Liturgy we have just celebrated:

APOLYTIKION FOR ST. JOHN CHRYSOSTOM

Grace shining forth from thy mouth like fire hath enlightened the universe and hath disclosed to the world treasures of uncovetousness and hath shown us the heights of humility. But as thou dost instruct us by thy words, O Father John Chrysostom, intercede with the Word, Christ God, to save  our souls.

KONTAKION FOR ST. JOHN CHRYSOSTOM

From the heavens thou hast received divine grace, and by thy lips dost thou teach all to worship the one God in Trinity, O venerable John Chrysostom, all-blessed one, rightly do we acclaim thee, for thou art a teacher revealing things divine. 

Or:

APOLYTIKION FOR ST. BASIL THE GREAT

Thy sound hath gone out into all the earth, for it hath received thy word. Thereby didst thou teach divine doctrine, make clear the nature of existence and order the habits of men, O thou of royal priesthood, venerable Father Basil, beseech Christ our God to grant us great mercy.

KONTAKION FOR ST. BASIL THE GREAT

Thou didst appear as an unshakable foundation of the Church, dispensing an inviolate dominion to all mortals and sealing it with thy doctrines, O revealer of heavenly things, venerable Basil.

Or:

APOLYTIKION FOR ST. GREGORY THE DIALOGIST 

As one endowed with discretion of speech, thou didst prove to be a most excellent dispenser of the word of God, O hierarch Gregory; for by thy life thou didst set the virtues before us, and thou dost shine forth with the brilliance of holiness. O righteous Father, do thou entreat Christ our God that we be granted great mercy. 

KONTAKION FOR ST. GREGORY THE DIALOGIST  

Thou God-inspired harp of the Church and truly God-possessed tongue of wisdom, O Dialogist, we praise thee as is meet; for thou didst emulate the zeal of the apostles and didst manifestly follow in their footsteps; and to thee we say: Rejoice, O Father Gregory.

And then: 

O protection of Christians that cannot be put to shame, mediation unto the Creator most constant: O despise not the suppliant voices of those who have sinned, but be thou quick, O good one, to come unto our aid, who in faith cry unto thee. Hasten to intercession, and speed thou to make supplication, thou who dost ever protect, O Theotokos, them that honor thee. 

Through the prayers of our holy fathers, O Lord Jesus Christ, our God, have mercy on us and save us. Amen.