Questions for Self Examination Before Confession


Questions for Self-Examination 

The Great Commandment 

Have I loved God with all my heart, all my soul, all my mind and all my strength and loved my neighbor as myself? Have I demonstrated this love by keeping the Gospel commandments of Christ? Have I forgiven those who have offended me, that I might ask God for forgiveness? 

First Commandment 

Have I believed in God the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit? Have I failed to trust in God and his mercy? Have I complained against God in adversity? Have I been thankful for God’s blessings? Have I doubted the Christian Faith and the teachings of the Church? Have I served God and kept his commandments? Have I given way to superstition? Have I frequented the religious meetings of heretics and schismatics? Have I neglected my duties to God through fear of ridicule or persecution? Have I failed to pray to God faithfully? Have I put myself before God? 

Second Commandment 

Have I made an idol of any person or thing? Have I given to anyone or anything the worship that is due to God alone? Have I set my life and priorities before the things of God? Have I examined the life and teachings of Christ and sincerely tried to follow him? Have I read the holy Scriptures regularly? Have I been irreverent during church services, let my attention wander or been insincere? Have I neglected to receive Holy Communion regularly or without due preparation? 

Third Commandment 

Have I profaned the holy name of God in any way? Have I cursed anyone or anything or sworn a false oath? Have I failed to give proper reverence to holy persons and things? Have I had due respect for the clergy of the Church or hindered them in performing God’s work? Have I broken any solemn vow or promise? Have I entered into any unlawful contract or made an unlawful promise?

Fourth Commandment 

Have I stayed away from church on Sundays or prevented others from going? Have I done unnecessary work on Sundays? Have I spent the day in an unwholesome fashion or profaned it by improper conduct? If I could not go to church because of illness or other grave cause, have I prayed at home? Have I caused anyone else to profane the Lord’s Day? Have I kept the fasts and feasts prescribed by the Church? 

Fifth Commandment 

Have I honored my parents by obedience (in childhood) and respect? Have I been guilty of deception or caused them pain by my words or actions? Have I neglected them or failed to help them? Have I done my duty towards my family? Have I been wanting in love or kindness toward my spouse or harmed him or her in any way? Have I failed to give my children a good example or failed to rear them properly? Have I corrected their faults with anger or impatience? Have I overindulged or spoiled them? Have I neglected my godchildren or failed in my obligations towards them? Have I worked for my employers honestly and diligently? Have I treated fairly all those who have worked for me? Have I honored God as my heavenly Father by treating others as my brothers, and have I honored the Church as my spiritual Mother by honoring and practicing my Faith in accordance with her teachings?

Sixth Commandment 

Have I caused harm to or the death of anyone or wished that I were dead? Have I done anything to shorten my own life or that of someone else by injuring health or through evil and intemperate living? Have I given way to anger or harmed others with words or actions? Have I defamed others who needed help or failed to stand up for those unjustly treated? Have I been cruel to anyone? Have I mistreated animals? Have I failed to forgive anyone or harbored evil thoughts against them? 

Seventh Commandment 

Have I given way to impure (lustful) thoughts, words, or deeds? Have I committed any sins of the flesh alone or with others? Have I degraded myself in any way or forgotten human dignity? Have I read immoral books or literature or viewed immoral internet sites? Have I viewed pornography in any form or delighted in obscenity of any kind? Have I associated with bad company or frequented filthy places? Have I eaten or drunk to excess or indulged in smoking? Have I been lazy, idle or wasted my time? Have I led others to commit sinful acts? Have I been unfaithful to any trust confided in me? 

Eighth Commandment 

Have I stolen anything or wished to do so? Have I kept anything that did not belong to me? Have I tried honestly to find owners of lost articles I have found? Have I cheated or defrauded anyone? Have I paid my debts? Have I lived within my means and not wastefully and extravagantly? Have I given to charitable causes in proportion to my means? Have I been honest and upright? 

Ninth Commandment 

Have I told lies or added to or subtracted from the truth in order to misrepresent facts? Have I made careless statements or spoken evil of anyone? Have I told any secrets entrusted to me or betrayed anyone? Have I gossiped about anyone or harmed their reputation? Have I concealed the truth, assisted in carrying out a lie or pretended to commit a sin of which I was not guilty? Have I tried to see the good in others rather than their shortcomings? 

Tenth Commandment 

Have I envied others for whom something good has come about? Have I been jealous of another’s good fortune? Have I set my heart on anything that belongs to another? Have I damaged or destroyed the property of others? Have I set my heart on things which God has not given me or been discontented with my lot in life? Have I been stingy? Have I held back anything due to another? Have I hoped for the downfall of anyone so that I might gain by it? Have I failed to be gracious and generous to anyone? Have I expected God to give me that which I would refuse to one of my fellow men?