A General Intercession

O Lord Jesus Christ our God, who in thy mercy and loving-kindness dost regard the prayers of all who call upon thee with their whole heart, incline thine ear and hear my prayer, now humbly offered unto thee: 

Remember, O Lord, thy Holy, Orthodox-Catholic and Apostolic Church; confirm, strengthen, increase and keep her in peace and preserve her unconquerable forever; 

Remember, O Lord, our father and Metropolitan N., [our Bishop, N.], and every Orthodox bishop, the Priests and Deacons, and all the clergy of thy Church, which thou hast ordained to feed thy flock with thy Word; and by their prayers, have mercy on me and save me, a sinner.

Remember, O Lord, our father(s), N. [my parish priest(s), my confessor], and our entire parish community in Christ, and grant us to serve and glorify thee in oneness of heart and mind. 

Remember, O Lord, our civil authorities and our armed forces, this city in which we dwell, and every city and countryside. Grant us peaceful times that we may lead a calm and tranquil life in all godliness and sanctity. 

Remember, O Lord, my parents, my brothers and sisters and all my relatives and all who are near and dear to me, NN., and grant them mercy, life, peace, health, salvation, visitation, pardon and remission of sins, that they may evermore praise and glorify thy holy name. 

Remember, O Lord, those who travel by land, sea and air, the young and the old, orphans and widows, the sick and the suffering, the sorrowing and the afflicted, those in captivity, and the needy poor; upon them all send forth thy mercies, for thou art the Giver of all good things. 

Remember, O Lord, me, thy humble servant; grant me thy grace, that I may be diligent and faithful, that I may avoid evil company and influence and resist all temptation, that I may lead a godly and righteous life, blameless and peaceful, ever serving thee, that I may be accounted worthy at the last to enter into the kingdom of heaven.

Remember, O Lord, those who have fallen asleep in the hope of resurrection unto life eternal, especially NN.; pardon all their transgressions both voluntary and involuntary, committed in word or deed or thought. Shelter them in a place of brightness, a place of verdure, a place of repose, whence all sickness, sorrow and sighing have fled away, and where the sight of thy face rejoiceth all thy saints from all the ages. Grant them thy heavenly kingdom and a portion in thine ineffable and eternal blessings and the enjoyment of thine unending life. 

Hear my prayer, O Lord, for thou art merciful and compassionate and the Lover of mankind, and unto thee are due all glory, honor and worship, to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit. Amen.