The Trisagion Prayers

In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.

Glory to thee, our God, glory to thee.

O heavenly King, the Comforter, Spirit of Truth, Who art in all places, and fillest all things, Treasury of good things, and Giver of life, come, and abide in us, and cleanse us from every stain; and save our souls, O good One.

Holy God, Holy Mighty, Holy Immortal: have mercy on us. (thrice)

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now and ever and unto ages of ages. Amen.

All-holy Trinity, have mercy on us. Lord, cleanse us from our sins. Master, pardon our iniquities. Holy One, visit and heal our infirmities for thy Name's sake.

Lord, have mercy. (thrice)

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy Name; thy kingdom come; thy will be done on earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread; and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.

Through the prayers of our holy Fathers, Lord Jesus Christ our God, have mercy on us and save us. Amen.

Troparia to the Holy Trinity

Having arisen from sleep, we fall down before thee, O Good One, and sing to thee, O Mighty One, the angelic hymn: Holy, holy, holy art thou, O God; through the Theotokos, have mercy on us. 

Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit. 

From bed and sleep thou hast raised me, O Lord; enlighten my mind and my heart, and open my lips that I may praise thee, O Holy Trinity: Holy, holy, holy art thou, O God; through the Theotokos, have mercy on us. 

Both now and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen. 

Suddenly the Judge shall come and the deeds of each shall be revealed; but with fear let us cry out in the middle of the night: Holy, holy, holy art thou, O God; through the Theotokos have mercy on us. 

Lord, have mercy. (12 times)

A Prayer to the Holy Trinity

Arising from sleep I thank thee, O Holy Trinity, because, of thy great goodness and long suffering, thou wast not wroth with me, slothful and sinful as I am, neither hast thou destroyed me in my transgressions, but in thy compassion thou hast raised me up as I lay in despair, that at dawn I might sing the glories of thy majesty. Do thou now enlighten the eyes of mine understanding and open my mouth to meditate on thy words, to understand thy commandments, to do thy will, to hymn thee in heartfelt confession, and to praise thine all-holy name, of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Come, let us worship and fall down before God our King. (metania) 

Come, let us worship and fall down before Christ, our King and God. (metania) 

Come, let us worship and fall down before Christ himself, our King and our God. (metania)

Psalm 50

Have mercy on me, O God, according to thy great mercy; and according to the multitude of thy compassions blot out my transgression. Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. For I know mine iniquity, and my sin is ever before me. Against thee only have I sinned and done this evil before thee, that thou mightest be justified in thy words and prevail when thou art judged. For behold, I was conceived in iniquities, and in sins did my mother bear me. For behold, thou hast loved truth; the hidden and secret things of thy wisdom hast thou made manifest unto me. Thou shalt sprinkle me with hyssop, and I shall be made clean; thou shalt wash me, and I shall be made whiter than snow. Thou shalt make me to hear joy and gladness; the bones that be humbled, they shall rejoice. Turn thy face away from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities. Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me. Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy Holy Spirit from me. Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, and with thy governing Spirit establish me. I shall teach transgressors thy ways, and the ungodly shall turn back unto thee. Deliver me from blood-guiltiness, O God, thou God of my salvation; my tongue shall rejoice in thy righteousness. O Lord, thou shalt open my lips, and my mouth shall declare thy praise. For if thou hadst desired sacrifice, I had given it; with whole-burnt offerings thou shalt not be pleased. A sacrifice unto God is a broken spirit; a heart that is broken and humbled God will not despise. Do good, O Lord, in thy good pleasure unto Sion, and let the walls of Jerusalem be builded. Then shalt thou be pleased with a sacrifice of righteousness, with oblation and whole-burnt offerings. Then shall they offer bullocks upon thine altar.

The Symbol of Faith (The Creed)

I believe in one God, the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth and of all things visible and invisible, 

And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the only-begotten, begotten of the Father before all worlds, 

Light of Light, very God of very God, begotten, not made, of one essence with the Father, by whom all things were made, 

Who for us men and for our salvation came down from heaven and was incarnate of the Holy Spirit and the Virgin Mary and became man 

And was crucified also for us under Pontius Pilate and suffered and was buried, and the third day He rose again, according to the Scriptures, And ascended into heaven and sitteth at the right hand of the Father; 

And he shall come again with glory to judge the living and the dead, whose kingdom shall have no end. 

And I believe in the Holy Spirit, the Lord and Giver of Life, who proceedeth from the Father, 

Who with the Father and the Son together is worshipped and glorified, who spake by the prophets; 

And I believe in one holy catholic and apostolic Church. 

I acknowledge one Baptism for the remission of sins. I look for the resurrection of the dead and the life of the world to come. 

Amen.

A Prayer of St. Basil the Great

We bless thee, O God most high and Lord of mercies, who ever workest great and mysterious deeds for us, glorious, wonderful, and numberless, who providest us with sleep as a rest from our infirmities and as a repose for our bodies tired by labor. We thank thee that thou hast not destroyed us in our transgressions, but in thy love toward mankind thou hast raised us up, as we lay in despair, that we may glorify thy majesty. We entreat thine infinite goodness, enlighten the eyes of our understanding and raise up our minds from the heavy sleep of indolence; open our mouths and fill them with thy praise, that we may unceasingly sing and confess thee, who art God glorified in all and by all, the eternal Father, with thine only-begotten Son and thine all-holy and good and life-giving Spirit, now and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

It is truly meet to bless thee, O Theotokos, who art ever blessed and all-blameless and the Mother of our God. More honorable than the cherubim and more glorious beyond compare than the seraphim, thou who without corruption didst bear God the Word and art truly Theotokos: we magnify thee.

(Private devotions may be added here.) 

Through the prayers of our holy fathers, O Lord Jesus Christ our God, have mercy on us and save us. Amen.