The Trisagion Prayers

In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.

Glory to thee, our God, glory to thee.

O heavenly King, the Comforter, Spirit of Truth, Who art in all places, and fillest all things, Treasury of good things, and Giver of life, come, and abide in us, and cleanse us from every stain; and save our souls, O good One.

Holy God, Holy Mighty, Holy Immortal: have mercy on us. (thrice)

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now and ever and unto ages of ages. Amen.

All-holy Trinity, have mercy on us. Lord, cleanse us from our sins. Master, pardon our iniquities. Holy One, visit and heal our infirmities for thy Name's sake.

Lord, have mercy. (thrice)

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy Name; thy kingdom come; thy will be done on earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread; and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.

Through the prayers of our holy Fathers, Lord Jesus Christ our God, have mercy on us and save us. Amen.

Troparia of Thanksgiving

Now that the day hath come to a close, I thank thee, O Lord, and I ask that the evening with the night may be sinless; grant this to me, O Saviour, and save me. 

Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit. 

Now that the day hath passed, I glorify thee, O Master, and I ask that the evening with the night may be without offence; grant this to me, O Saviour, and save me. 

Both now and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen. 

Now that the day hath run its course, I praise thee, O Holy One, and I ask that the evening with the night may be undisturbed; grant this to me, O Saviour, and save me. 

Lord, have mercy. (twelve times)

An Evening Prayer of Repentance

O Lord our God, if during this day I have sinned, whether in word or deed or thought, forgive me all, for thou art good and lovest mankind. Grant me peaceful and undisturbed sleep, and deliver me from all influence and temptation of the evil one. Raise me up again in proper time that I may glorify thee; for thou art blessed, with thine only-begotten Son and thine all-holy Spirit, now and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen. 

O most glorious, ever-virgin, blessed Theotokos, present our prayer to thy Son, our God, and intercede with him that through thee he may save our souls. 

My hope is the Father; my refuge is the Son; my shelter is the Holy Spirit. O Holy Trinity, glory to thee. 

In thee, O Mother of God, I place all my hope; keep me under thy protection. 

Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos; Mary, full of grace, the Lord is with thee. Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb, for thou hast borne the Saviour of our souls.

A Prayer to One’s Patron Saint 

Pray unto God for me, O Saint N., well-pleasing to God, for I flee unto thee, who art the speedy helper and intercessor for my soul. 

(Private devotions may be added here.) 

As you lie down to sleep, say: 

Into thy hands, O Lord, I commend my soul and my body. Do thou thyself bless me, have mercy upon me and grant me life eternal. Amen.
